Add global sort related docs. (#14801)
pingcap/docs: tidb-global-sort.md

---
title: TiDB Global Sort
summary: Learn the use cases, limitations, usage, and implementation principles of the TiDB Global Sort.
---

# TiDB Global Sort

> **Warning:**
>
> This feature is an experimental feature. It is not recommended to use it in production environments.

<CustomContent platform="tidb-cloud">

> **Note:**
>
> Currently, this feature is only applicable to TiDB Dedicated clusters. You cannot use it on TiDB Serverless clusters.

</CustomContent>

> # Feature Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Feature Overview

```

> The global sort feature we introduce enhances the stability and efficiency of the Import and DDL (Data Definition Language) functionality. It serves as a general operator within our distributed parallel execution framework and can also be deployed as a cloud service. Moreover, it supports various shared storage interfaces (e.g., S3, POSIX usage ), facilitating seamless integration with different storage systems. This versatility enables efficient and flexible data sorting operations across diverse use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiDB's Global Sort feature enhances the stability and efficiency of Import and DDL (Data Definition Language) operations. It serves as a general operator in the [distributed parallel execution framework](/tidb-distributed-execution-framework.md) and can also be used as a cloud service.

Additionally, it supports multiple shared storage interfaces such as S3 and POSIX, enabling seamless integration with different storage systems. This flexibility enables efficient and adaptable data sorting for various use cases.
```

> # Goals and non-goals
> ## Goals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Goals and non-goals

### Goals

```

> Implementing this global sort feature facilitates the efficient import into and create index. By incorporating this functionality into backend tasks, we can achieve improved stability, control, and scalability. Ultimately, this enhancement results in a better user experience and higher service quality provided by TiDB. So, in conclusion, the global sort feature will be implemented as an operator within the unified distributed parallel execution framework. This operator will provide services for executing tasks within the framework, ensuring efficient and parallel sorting of data on a global scale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main goal of the Global Sort feature is to enhance the efficiency of data import and index creation processes. By integrating this feature into backend tasks, we can improve stability, control, and scalability. As a result, TiDB will offer an enhanced user experience and higher-quality service.

The Global Sort feature is implemented as an operator within the unified distributed parallel execution framework. It provides services for executing tasks within the framework and ensuring efficient and parallel sorting of data on a global scale.
```

> ## Non-goals 
> Currently, It will not be utilized as a component of the query execution process responsible for sorting the query results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Non-goals

Currently, the Global Sort feature is not used as a component of the query execution process responsible for sorting query results.
```

## Usage

1. To enable the distributed framework, set the value of [`tidb_enable_dist_task`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_dist_task-new-in-v710) to `ON`:

    ```sql
    SET GLOBAL tidb_enable_dist_task = ON;

>     ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```

```

> 2. Also, need to set [`tidb_cloud_storage_uri`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cloud_storage_uri-new-in-v740) to correct cloud storage path.[Example](/br/backup-and-restore-storages.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Set [`tidb_cloud_storage_uri`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cloud_storage_uri-new-in-v740) to the correct cloud storage path. See [examples](/br/backup-and-restore-storages.md).

```

   ```sql
   SET GLOBAL tidb_cloud_storage_uri = 's3://my-bucket/test-data?role-arn=arn:aws:iam::888888888888:role/my-role'
   ```

## Implementation principles

> The Algorithm of the TiDB backend task distributed execution framework is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The algorithm of the TiDB backend task distributed execution framework is as follows:
```

![Algorithm of Global Sort](/media/dist-task/global-sort.jpeg)

> ### Algorithm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The details of the algorithm is as follows:

```

> Step 1: scan and prepare data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 1: scan and prepare data

```

>   1. After  TiDB node scans a specific volume of data
>     1.  Encodes them into Key-Value pairs.
>     2. Sort them into several block data segments, each segment will be one file and be uploaded into S3
>   2. Also record a serial Actual Key-Value Distribution for each segment(called statistics file), which is key preparation for scalable sort implementation.  Then upload them into S3 with the real data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. After a TiDB node scans a specific volume of data:

    1. It encodes them into Key-Value pairs.
    2. It sorts them into several block data segments, where each segment is one file and is uploaded into S3.

2. The TiDB node also records a serial actual Key-Value distribution for each segment (referred to as a statistics file), which is a key preparation for scalable sort implementation. These files are then uploaded into S3 along with the real data.
```

> Step 2: From the first step, we got a list of sorted blocks and it correlated statistics file, whick gives us the number of locally sorted blocks. Also, we have a real data scope that could be used by PD to split and scatter. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Step 2: Sorting and distributing data

1. From Step 1, we obtain a list of sorted blocks and their correlated statistics files, which gives us the number of locally sorted blocks. We also have a real data scope that could be used by PD to split and scatter.

```

>   1. Sort statistics file records to cut an almost even range to be subtasks of step2 sort and ingest regions.
>   2. Distribute subtasks to TiDB nodes for execution.
>   3. All TiDB nodes will independently sort subtask's data into ranges and ingest them into TiKV without overlap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The records in the statistics file are sorted to cut an almost even range to be subtasks of Step 2's sort and ingest regions.
3. The subtasks are distributed to TiDB nodes for execution.
4. All TiDB nodes will independently sort the data of subtasks into ranges and ingest them into TiKV without overlap.
```

---
title: TiDB Global Sort
summary: Learn the use cases, limitations, usage, and implementation principles of the TiDB Global Sort.
---

# TiDB Global Sort

> **Warning:**
>
> This feature is an experimental feature. It is not recommended to use it in production environments.

<CustomContent platform="tidb-cloud">

> **Note:**
>
> Currently, this feature is only applicable to TiDB Dedicated clusters. You cannot use it on TiDB Serverless clusters.

</CustomContent>

> ## Feature Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Feature overview
```

> ## Feature overview

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Overview
```

> TiDB's Global Sort feature enhances the stability and efficiency of data import and DDL (Data Definition Language) operations. It serves as a general operator in the [distributed parallel execution framework](/tidb-distributed-execution-framework.md). Through the distributed parallel execution framework, it provides a global sort service on cloud.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TiDB Global Sort feature enhances the stability and efficiency of data import and DDL (Data Definition Language) operations. It serves as a general operator in the [distributed execution framework](/tidb-distributed-execution-framework.md). Through the distributed execution framework, it provides a global sort service on cloud.
```

Additionally, it can be easily extended to support multiple shared storage interfaces such as S3 and POSIX, enabling seamless integration with different storage systems. This flexibility enables efficient and adaptable data sorting for various use cases.

## Use cases

> The Global Sort feature is designed to enhance the efficiency of `IMPORT INTO` and `CREATE INDEX`. By integrating Global Sort into backend tasks, we can improve stability, control, and scalability. As a result, TiDB will offer an enhanced user experience and higher-quality service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Global Sort feature is designed to enhance the efficiency of `IMPORT INTO` and `CREATE INDEX`. By integrating Global Sort into backend tasks, you can improve stability, control, and scalability. As a result, TiDB offers an enhanced user experience and higher-quality service.
```

The Global Sort feature provides services for executing tasks within the unified distributed parallel execution framework and ensuring efficient and parallel sorting of data on a global scale.

## Limitations

Currently, the Global Sort feature is not used as a component of the query execution process responsible for sorting query results.

> ## Use Global Sort

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Usage
```

1. Before enabling Global Sort, you need to enable the distributed execution framework. To do so, set the value of [`tidb_enable_dist_task`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_dist_task-new-in-v710) to `ON`:

    ```sql
    SET GLOBAL tidb_enable_dist_task = ON;
    ```

> 2. Set [`tidb_cloud_storage_uri`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cloud_storage_uri-new-in-v740) to the correct cloud storage path. See [an example](/br/backup-and-restore-storages.md).
> 
>    ```sql
>    SET GLOBAL tidb_cloud_storage_uri = 's3://my-bucket/test-data?role-arn=arn:aws:iam::888888888888:role/my-role'
>    ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
2. Set [`tidb_cloud_storage_uri`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cloud_storage_uri-new-in-v740) to a correct cloud storage path. See [an example](/br/backup-and-restore-storages.md).

    ```sql
    SET GLOBAL tidb_cloud_storage_uri = 's3://my-bucket/test-data?role-arn=arn:aws:iam::888888888888:role/my-role'
    ```
````

## Implementation principles

> The algorithm of the TiDB backend task distributed execution framework is as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The algorithm of the Global Sort feature is as follows:
```

![Algorithm of Global Sort](/media/dist-task/global-sort.jpeg)

The detailed implementation principles is as follows:

### Step 1: Scan and prepare data

1. After TiDB nodes scan a specific range of data:

    1. TiDB nodes encode them into Key-Value pairs.

>     2. TiDB nodes sort Key-Value pairs into several block data segments, where each segment is one file and is uploaded into S3.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    2. TiDB nodes sort Key-Value pairs into several block data segments, where each segment is one file and is uploaded into the cloud storage.
```

> 2. The TiDB node also records a serial actual Key-Value ranges for each segment (referred to as a statistics file), which is a key preparation for scalable sort implementation. These files are then uploaded into S3 along with the real data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The TiDB node also records a serial actual Key-Value ranges for each segment (referred to as a statistics file), which is a key preparation for scalable sort implementation. These files are then uploaded into the cloud storage along with the real data.
```

### Step 2: Sort and distribute data

> From Step 1, we have obtained a list of sorted blocks and their correlated statistics files, which gives us the number of locally sorted blocks. We also have a real data scope that can be used by PD to split and scatter. The following steps are performed:
> 
> 1. The records in the statistics file are sorted to cut an almost even range to be subtasks of Step 2's sort and ingest regions.
> 2. The subtasks are distributed to TiDB nodes for execution.
> 3. All TiDB nodes will independently sort the data of subtasks into ranges and ingest them into TiKV without overlap.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From step 1, the Global Sort program obtains a list of sorted blocks and their corresponding statistics files, which provide the number of locally sorted blocks. The program also has a real data scope that can be used by PD to split and scatter. The following steps are performed:

1. Sort the records in the statistics file to divide them into nearly equal-sized ranges, which are subtasks that will be executed in parallel.
2. Distribute the subtasks to TiDB nodes for execution.
3. Each TiDB node independently sorts the data of subtasks into ranges and ingests them into TiKV without overlap.
```

## Use cases

The Global Sort feature enhances the stability and efficiency of `IMPORT INTO` and `CREATE INDEX`. By globally sorting the data that are processed by the tasks, it improves the stability, controllability, and scalability of writing data to TiKV. This provides an enhanced user experience for data import and DDL tasks, as well as higher-quality services.

The Global Sort feature executes tasks within the unified distributed parallel execution framework, ensuring efficient and parallel sorting of data on a global scale.

## Limitations

Currently, the Global Sort feature is not used as a component of the query execution process responsible for sorting query results.

## Usage

To enable Global Sort, follow these steps:

1. Enable the distributed execution framework by setting the value of [`tidb_enable_dist_task`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_dist_task-new-in-v710) to `ON`:

    ```sql
    SET GLOBAL tidb_enable_dist_task = ON;
    ```

> 2. Set [`tidb_cloud_storage_uri`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cloud_storage_uri-new-in-v740) to a correct cloud storage path. See [an example](/br/backup-and-restore-storages.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<CustomContent platform="tidb">

2. Set [`tidb_cloud_storage_uri`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cloud_storage_uri-new-in-v740) to a correct cloud storage path. See [an example](/br/backup-and-restore-storages.md).

</CustomContent>
<CustomContent platform="tidb-cloud">

2. Set [`tidb_cloud_storage_uri`](/system-variables.md#tidb_cloud_storage_uri-new-in-v740) to a correct cloud storage path. See [an example](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/backup-and-restore-storages).

</CustomContent>
```

---
title: TiDB Global Sort
summary: Learn the use cases, limitations, usage, and implementation principles of the TiDB Global Sort.
---

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD029 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

```

---
title: TiDB Global Sort
summary: Learn the use cases, limitations, usage, and implementation principles of the TiDB Global Sort.
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD029 -->

> <!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD046 -->
```

# TiDB Global Sort

> **Warning:**
>
> This feature is experimental. It is not recommended that you use it in the production environment. This feature might be changed or removed without prior notice. If you find a bug, you can report an [issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues) on GitHub.

<CustomContent platform="tidb-cloud">

> **Note:**
>
> Currently, this feature is only applicable to TiDB Dedicated clusters. You cannot use it on TiDB Serverless clusters.

</CustomContent>

## Overview

The TiDB Global Sort feature enhances the stability and efficiency of data import and DDL (Data Definition Language) operations. It serves as a general operator in the [distributed execution framework](/tidb-distributed-execution-framework.md), providing a global sort service on cloud.

> The Global Sort feature can be easily extended to support multiple shared storage interfaces such as S3 and POSIX, enabling seamless integration with different storage systems. This flexibility enables efficient and adaptable data sorting for various use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Global Sort feature currently only supports using Amazon S3 as cloud storage. In future releases, it will be extended to support multiple shared storage interfaces, such as OSIX, enabling seamless integration with different storage systems. This flexibility enables efficient and adaptable data sorting for various use cases.
```
